Wikipedia (English)
Article title: Business intelligence
Page URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_intelligence
License: CC BY-SA 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/)
Retrieved (UTC): 2026-04-20
Text is from Wikipedia parse API (HTML stripped in-script; tables/figures may be lossy).

--- Article text ---

Strategies for analysis and use of data

 Business administration
 Accounting

 Management accounting
 Financial accounting
 Audit

 Business entity ( list )

 Corporate group
 Corporation sole
 Company
 Conglomerate
 Holding company
 Cooperative
 Corporation
 Joint-stock company
 Limited liability company
 Partnership
 Privately held company
 Sole proprietorship
 State-owned enterprise

 Corporate governance

 Annual general meeting
 Board of directors
 Supervisory board
 Advisory board
 Audit committee

 Corporate law

 Commercial law
 Constitutional documents
 Contract
 Corporate crime
 Corporate liability
 Insolvency law
 International trade law
 Mergers and acquisitions

 Corporate title

 Chairman
 Chief business officer / Chief brand officer
 Chief executive officer / Chief operating officer
 Chief financial officer
 Chief human resources officer
 Chief information officer / Chief marketing officer
 Chief product officer / Chief technology officer

 Economics

 Commodity
 Public economics
 Labour economics
 Development economics
 International economics
 Mixed economy
 Planned economy
 Econometrics
 Environmental economics
 Open economy
 Market economy
 Knowledge economy
 Microeconomics
 Macroeconomics
 Economic development
 Economic statistics

 Finance

 Financial statement
 Insurance
 Factoring
 Cash conversion cycle
 Insider dealing
 Capital budgeting
 Commercial bank
 Derivative
 Financial statement analysis
 Financial risk
 Public finance
 Corporate finance
 Managerial finance
 International finance
 Liquidation
 Stock market
 Financial market
 Tax
 Financial institution
 Capital management
 Venture capital

 Types of management

 Asset
 Brand
 Business intelligence
 Business development
 Capacity
 Capability
 Change
 innovation
 Commercial
 Marketing
 Communications
 Configuration
 Conflict
 Content
 Customer relationship
 Distributed
 Earned value
 Electronic business
 Enterprise resource planning  
 management information system
 Financial
 Human resource  
 development
 Incident
 Knowledge
 Legal
 Materials
 Network
 administrator
 Office
 Operations  
 services
 Performance
 Power
 Process
 Product life-cycle
 Product
 Project
 Property
 Quality
 Records
 Resource
 Risk  
 crisis
 Sales
 Security
 Service
 Strategic
 Supply chain
 Systems
 administrator
 Talent
 Technology

 Organization

 Architecture
 Behavior
 Communication
 Culture
 Conflict
 Development
 Engineering
 Hierarchy
 Patterns
 Space
 Structure

 Trade

 Business analysis
 Business ethics
 Business plan
 Business judgment rule
 Consumer behaviour
 International business
 Business model
 International trade
 Trade route
 Business process
 Business statistics

 Business portal v t e

 Business intelligence ( BI ) consists of strategies, methodologies, and technologies used by enterprises for data analysis and management of business information to inform business strategies and business operations. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Common functions of BI technologies include reporting , online analytical processing , analytics , dashboard development, data mining , process mining , complex event processing , business performance management , benchmarking , text mining , predictive analytics , and prescriptive analytics .

 BI tools can handle large amounts of structured and sometimes unstructured data to help organizations identify, develop, and otherwise create new strategic business opportunities. They aim to allow for the easy interpretation of these big data . Identifying new opportunities and implementing an effective strategy based on insights is assumed to potentially provide businesses with a competitive market advantage and long-term stability, and help them take strategic decisions. [ 3 ]

 Business intelligence can be used by enterprises to support a wide range of business decisions ranging from operational to strategic. Basic operating decisions include product positioning or pricing. Strategic business decisions involve priorities, goals, and directions at the broadest level. In all cases, business intelligence is considered most effective when it combines data from the market in which a company operates (external data) with data from internal company sources, such as financial and operational information. When integrated, external and internal data provide a comprehensive view that creates ‘intelligence’ not possible from any single data source alone. [ 4 ]

 Among their many uses, business intelligence tools empower organizations to gain insight into new markets, to assess demand and suitability of products and services for different market segments , and to gauge the impact of marketing efforts. [ 5 ]

 BI applications use data gathered from a data warehouse (DW) or from a data mart , and the concepts of BI and DW combine as "BI/DW" [ 6 ]
or as "BIDW". A data warehouse contains a copy of analytical data that facilitates decision support .

 History [ edit ]

 The earliest known use of the term business intelligence is in Richard Millar Devens' Cyclopædia of Commercial and Business Anecdotes (1865). Devens used the term to describe how the banker Sir Henry Furnese gained profit by receiving and acting upon information about his environment, prior to his competitors:

 Throughout Holland, Flanders, France, and Germany, he maintained a complete and perfect train of business intelligence. The news of the many battles fought was thus received first by him, and the fall of Namur added to his profits, owing to his early receipt of the news.

 — Devens, p. 210

 The ability to collect and react accordingly based on the information retrieved, Devens says, is central to business intelligence. [ 7 ]

 When Hans Peter Luhn , a researcher at IBM , used the term business intelligence in an article published in 1958, he employed the Webster's Dictionary definition of intelligence: "the ability to apprehend the interrelationships of presented facts in such a way as to guide action towards a desired goal." [ 8 ]

 In 1989, Howard Dresner (later a Gartner analyst) proposed business intelligence as an umbrella term to describe "concepts and methods to improve business decision making by using fact-based support systems." [ 9 ] It was not until the late 1990s that this usage was widespread. [ 10 ]

 Definition [ edit ]

 According to Solomon Negash and Paul Gray, business intelligence (BI) can be defined as systems that combine:

 Data gathering
 Data storage
 Knowledge management
 with analysis to evaluate complex corporate and competitive information for presentation to planners and decision makers, with the objective of improving the timeliness and the quality of the input to the decision process." [ 11 ]

 According to Forrester Research , business intelligence is "a set of methodologies, processes, architectures, and technologies that transform raw data into meaningful and useful information used to enable more effective strategic, tactical, and operational insights and decision-making." [ 12 ] Under this definition, business intelligence encompasses information management ( data integration , data quality , data warehousing, master-data management, text- and content-analytics, et al.). Therefore, Forrester refers to data preparation and data usage as two separate but closely linked segments of the business-intelligence architectural stack.

 Some elements of business intelligence are: [ citation needed ]

 Multidimensional aggregation and allocation
 Denormalization , tagging, and standardization
 Realtime reporting with analytical alert
 A method of interfacing with unstructured data sources
 Group consolidation, budgeting, and rolling forecasts
 Statistical inference and probabilistic simulation
 Key performance indicators optimization
 Version control and process management
 Open item management
 Forrester distinguishes this from the business-intelligence market , which is "just the top layers of the BI architectural stack, such as reporting , analytics, and dashboards." [ 13 ]

 Compared with competitive intelligence [ edit ]

 Though the term business intelligence is sometimes a synonym for competitive intelligence (because they both support decision making ), BI uses technologies, processes, and applications to analyze mostly internal, structured data and business processes while competitive intelligence gathers, analyzes, and disseminates information with a topical focus on company competitors. If understood broadly, competitive intelligence can be considered as a subset of business intelligence. [ 14 ]

 Compared with business analytics [ edit ]

 Business intelligence and business analytics are sometimes used interchangeably, but there are alternate definitions. [ 15 ] Thomas Davenport , professor of information technology and management at Babson College argues that business intelligence should be divided into querying , reporting, Online analytical processing (OLAP), an "alerts" tool, and business analytics. In this definition, business analytics is the subset of BI focusing on statistics, prediction, and optimization, rather than the reporting functionality. [ 16 ]

 Unstructured data [ edit ]

 Business operations can generate a very large amount of data in the form of e-mails, memos, notes from call-centers, news, user groups, chats, reports, web-pages, presentations, image-files, video-files, and marketing material. According to Merrill Lynch , more than 85% of all business information exists in these forms; a company might only use such a document a single time. [ 17 ] Because of the way it is produced and stored, this information is either unstructured or semi-structured .

 The management of semi-structured data is an unsolved problem in the information technology industry. [ 18 ] According to projections from Gartner (2003), white-collar workers spend 30–40% of their time searching, finding, and assessing unstructured data. BI uses both structured and unstructured data. The former is easy to search, and the latter contains a large quantity of the information needed for analysis and decision-making. [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Because of the difficulty of properly searching, finding, and assessing unstructured or semi-structured data, organizations may not draw upon these vast reservoirs of information, which could influence a particular decision, task, or project. This can ultimately lead to poorly informed decision-making. [ 17 ]

 Therefore, when designing a business intelligence/DW-solution, the specific problems associated with semi-structured and unstructured data must be accommodated for as well as those for the structured data.

 Limitations of semi-structured and unstructured data [ edit ]

 This section needs to be updated . The reason given is: It's dubious that searchability and semantic analysis are still limitations at the current stage of NLP and AI development . Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. ( December 2023 )

 There are several challenges to developing BI with semi-structured data. According to Inmon & Nesavich, [ 20 ] some of those are:

 Physically accessing unstructured textual data – unstructured data is stored in a huge variety of formats.
 Terminology – Among researchers and analysts, there is a need to develop standardized terminology.
 Volume of data – As stated earlier, up to 85% of all data exists as semi-structured data. Couple that with the need for word-to-word and semantic analysis.
 Searchability of unstructured textual data – A simple search on some data, e.g. apple, results in links where there is a reference to that precise search term. (Inmon & Nesavich, 2008) [ 20 ] gives an example: "a search is made on the term felony. In a simple search, the term felony is used, and everywhere there is a reference to felony, a hit to an unstructured document is made. But a simple search is crude. It does not find references to crime, arson, murder, embezzlement, vehicular homicide, and such, even though these crimes are types of felonies".
 Metadata [ edit ]

 To solve problems with searchability and assessment of data, it is necessary to know something about the content. This can be done by adding context through the use of metadata . [ 17 ] [ needs independent confirmation ] Many systems already capture some metadata (e.g. filename, author, size, etc.), but more useful would be metadata about the actual content – e.g. summaries, topics, people, or companies mentioned. Two technologies designed for generating metadata about content are automatic categorization and information extraction .

 Business intelligence and AI [ edit ]

 Business intelligence includes the integration of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) techniques into BI platforms to support more advanced analysis, such as augmented analytics, which enhances data interpretation and insight discovery beyond traditional reporting and visualization tools. [ 21 ]

 Generative AI [ edit ]

 Generative business intelligence is the application of generative AI techniques, such as large language models , in business intelligence. This combination facilitates data analysis and enables users to interact with data more intuitively, generating actionable insights through natural language queries. Microsoft Copilot was, for example, integrated into the business analytics tool Power BI . [ 22 ]

 Applications [ edit ]

 Business intelligence can be applied to the following business purposes:

 Performance metrics and benchmarking inform business leaders of progress towards business goals. [ 23 ] ( Business process management ). [ citation needed ]
 Analytics quantify processes for a business to arrive at optimal decisions, and to perform business knowledge discovery. Analytics may variously involve data mining , process mining , statistical analysis , predictive analytics , predictive modeling , business process modeling , data lineage , complex event processing , and prescriptive analytics . For example within banking industry, academic research has explored potential for BI based analytics in credit evaluation, customer churn management for managerial adoption [ 24 ]
 Reporting , dashboards and data visualization , [ 23 ] executive information system , and/or OLAP
 BI can facilitate collaboration both inside and outside the business by enabling data sharing and electronic data interchange [ 23 ]
 Knowledge management is concerned with the creation, distribution, use, and management of business intelligence, and of business knowledge in general. [ 23 ] Knowledge management leads to learning management and regulatory compliance . [ citation needed ]
 Risk [ edit ]

 In a 2013 report, Gartner categorized business intelligence vendors as either an independent "pure-play" vendor or a consolidated "mega-vendor". [ 25 ] [ non-primary source needed ] In 2019, the BI market was shaken within Europe for the new legislation of GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation) which puts the responsibility of data collection and storage onto the data user with strict laws in place to make sure the data is compliant. Growth within Europe has steadily increased since May 2019 when GDPR was brought in. The legislation refocused companies to look at their own data from a compliance perspective but also revealed future opportunities using personalization and external BI providers to increase market share. [ 26 ]

 Business Intelligence Competency Center [ edit ]

 A Business Intelligence Competency Center (BICC) is a team that supports the use of business intelligence in an organization. [ 27 ] Since 2001, the BICC concept has been refined through implementations in organizations that have adopted BI and related analytical software .

 Usage of the term BICC has varied significantly between implementations in different organizations. The adoption of the BICC concept has led some organizations to establish units that focus on the use of BI software for decision-making, which may increase the value an organization gets out of its implementation of BI. [ 28 ]

 A BICC coordinates activities and resources to facilitate a fact-based approach to decision-making within an organization. It has responsibility for the governance structure for BI and the use of analytical programs, projects, practices, software , and architecture. A BICC is responsible for developing plans, priorities, infrastructure, and competencies that can support strategic decision-making using BI and analytical software. [ 29 ]

 Analytics Competency Center (ACC) [ edit ]

 In recent years, knowledge-oriented shared service centers have emerged in many organizations. Their primary focus has been the offering of analytics and data mining as an internal service across the organization. [ 30 ] Such a center may be referred to as an Analytics Competency Center (ACC), Analytics Center of Excellence, Analytics Service Center, Big Data CoC, or Big Data Lab.

 By the end of 2017, a report by Gartner Research estimated that approximately 25% of large firms had a dedicated ACC unit (or equivalent) for data and analytics. [ 31 ] In contrast to classic BICCs, these centers do not place emphasis on reporting, historical analysis, and dashboards. ACCs aim to enhance a company's data capabilities by building expertise in data analytics , formulating a data strategy, identifying use cases for data mining, and promoting the adoption of analytics within the organization. [ 32 ] Although BICCs can change into ACCs, new ACC formations can also occur in practice.

 See also [ edit ]

 Agile business intelligence  – Use of agile software development for business intelligence projects
 Analytic applications  – Business application software
 Arcplan  – Business intelligence software company
 Artificial intelligence marketing  – Marketing of AI products Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
 Business activity monitoring
 Business intelligence 2.0
 Business intelligence software  – Application software to read and analyze stored data
 Business process discovery  – Class of process mining techniques
 Business process management  – Business management discipline
 Customer dynamics
 Decision engineering  – Subfield of machine learning Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
 Embedded analytics  – Type of analytics
 Enterprise planning systems
 Integrated business planning  – Type of planning strategy
 Management information system  – Information system used for organizational decision-making and coordination
 Mobile business intelligence  – Business intelligence systems delivered via mobile device
 Process mining  – Data mining technique using event logs
 Real-time business intelligence
 Sales intelligence  – Process of managing interactions with customers Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
 Test and learn

 References [ edit ]

 ^ Dedić N. & Stanier noC. (2016). "Measuring the Success of Changes to Existing Business Intelligence Solutions to Improve Business Intelligence Reporting" (PDF) . Measuring the Success of Changes to Existing Business Intelligence Solutions to Improve Business Intelligence Reporting. Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing . Vol. 268. Springer International Publishing. pp.  225– 236. doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-49944-4_17 . ISBN   978-3-319-49943-7 . S2CID   30910248 .

 ^ "What Is Business Intelligence (BI)? | IBM" . IBM . 9 August 2021.

 ^ ( Rud, Olivia (2009). Business Intelligence Success Factors: Tools for Aligning Your Business in the Global Economy . Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley & Sons. ISBN   978-0-470-39240-9 . )

 ^ Coker, Frank (2014). Pulse: Understanding the Vital Signs of Your Business . Ambient Light Publishing. pp.  41– 42. ISBN   978-0-9893086-0-1 .

 ^
Chugh, R. & Grandhi, S. (2013,). "Why Business Intelligence? Significance of Business Intelligence tools and integrating BI governance with corporate governance". International Journal of E-Entrepreneurship and Innovation , vol. 4, no.2, pp. 1–14.

 ^
 Golden, Bernard (2013). Amazon Web Services For Dummies . John Wiley & Sons. p. 234. ISBN   9781118652268 . Retrieved 6 July 2014 . [...] traditional business intelligence or data warehousing tools (the terms are used so interchangeably that they're often referred to as BI/DW) are extremely expensive [...]

 ^ Miller Devens, Richard (1865). Cyclopaedia of Commercial and Business Anecdotes; Comprising Interesting Reminiscences and Facts, Remarkable Traits and Humors of Merchants, Traders, Bankers Etc. in All Ages and Countries . D. Appleton and company. p.  210 . Retrieved 15 February 2014 . business intelligence.

 ^
 Luhn, H. P. (1958). "A Business Intelligence System" (PDF) . IBM Journal of Research and Development . 2 (4): 314– 319. doi : 10.1147/rd.24.0314 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 September 2008.

 ^ D. J. Power (10 March 2007). "A Brief History of Decision Support Systems, version 4.0" . DSSResources.COM . Retrieved 10 July 2008 .

 ^ Power, D. J. "A Brief History of Decision Support Systems" . Retrieved 1 November 2010 .

 ^ Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg (21 November 2008). Topic Overview: Business Intelligence . doi : 10.1007/978-3-540-48716-6 . ISBN   978-3-540-48715-9 .

 ^ Evelson, Boris (21 November 2008). "Topic Overview: Business Intelligence" .

 ^ Evelson, Boris (29 April 2010). "Want to know what Forrester's lead data analysts are thinking about BI and the data domain?" . Archived from the original on 6 August 2016 . Retrieved 4 November 2010 .

 ^ Kobielus, James (30 April 2010). "What's Not BI? Oh, Don't Get Me Started... Oops Too Late... Here Goes..." Archived from the original on 7 May 2010 . Retrieved 4 November 2010 . "Business" intelligence is a non-domain-specific catchall for all the types of analytic data that can be delivered to users in reports, dashboards, and the like. When you specify the subject domain for this intelligence, then you can refer to "competitive intelligence", "market intelligence", "social intelligence", "financial intelligence", "HR intelligence", "supply chain intelligence", and the like.

 ^ "Business Analytics vs Business Intelligence?" . timoelliott.com. 9 March 2011 . Retrieved 15 June 2014 .

 ^ Henschen, Doug (4 January 2010). "Analytics at Work: Q&A with Tom Davenport" (Interview). Archived from the original on 3 April 2012 . Retrieved 26 September 2011 .

 ^ a b c Rao, R. (2003). "From unstructured data to actionable intelligence" (PDF) . IT Professional . 5 (6): 29– 35. Bibcode : 2003ITPro...5f..29R . doi : 10.1109/MITP.2003.1254966 .

 ^ a b Blumberg, R. & S. Atre (2003). "The Problem with Unstructured Data" (PDF) . DM Review : 42– 46. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 January 2011.

 ^ Negash, S (2004). "Business Intelligence" . Communications of the Association for Information Systems . 13 : 177– 195. doi : 10.17705/1CAIS.01315 .

 ^ a b Inmon, B. & A. Nesavich, "Unstructured Textual Data in the Organization" from "Managing Unstructured data in the organization", Prentice Hall 2008, pp. 1–13

 ^ "What is business intelligence? (Definition, tools and FAQs)" . Indeed . Retrieved 15 January 2026 .

 ^ Novet, Jordan (23 May 2023). "Microsoft is bringing an A.I. chatbot to data analysis" . CNBC . Retrieved 19 August 2024 .

 ^ a b c d Feldman, D.; Himmelstein, J. (2013). Developing Business Intelligence Apps for SharePoint . O'Reilly Media, Inc. pp.  140– 1. ISBN   9781449324681 . Retrieved 8 May 2018 .

 ^ Moro, Sérgio; Cortez, Paulo; Rita, Paulo (February 2015). "Business intelligence in banking: A literature analysis from 2002 to 2013 using text mining and latent Dirichlet allocation". Expert Systems with Applications . 42 (3): 1314– 1324. doi : 10.1016/j.eswa.2014.09.024 . hdl : 10071/8522 . S2CID   15595226 .

 ^ Andrew Brust (14 February 2013). "Gartner releases 2013 BI Magic Quadrant" . ZDNet . Retrieved 21 August 2013 .

 ^ SaaS BI growth will soar in 2010 . InfoWorld (1 February 2010). Retrieved 17 January 2012.

 ^ Miller, G., Bräutigam, B, & Gerlach, S. (2006). Business Intelligence Competency Centers: A Team Approach to Competitive Advantage. Hoboken: Wiley

 ^ Miller, G., Queisser, T (2008), The Modern BI Organization, Heidelberg, MaxMetrics GmbH

 ^ Miller, G., Bräutigam, B, & Gerlach, S. (2006). Business Intelligence Competency Centers: A Team Approach to Competitive Advantage. Hoboken: Wiley

 ^ Watson, H.J. (2015). "How Big Data Applications are Revolutionizing Decision Making". International Journal of Database Theory & Application . 20 (1).

 ^ Cearley, David (2017). "Top 10 Strategic Technology Trends for 2017: A Gartner Trend Insight Report" . Gartner . Retrieved 28 June 2017 .

 ^ Ronny, Schüritz; Ella, Brand; Gerhard, Satzger; Johannes, Bischhoffshausen (2017). "HOW TO CULTIVATE ANALYTICS CAPABILITIES WITHIN AN ORGANIZATION? – DESIGN AND TYPES OF ANALYTICS COMPETENCY CENTERS" . Proceedings of the 25th European Conference on Information Systems : 389– 404.

 Bibliography [ edit ]

 Kimball, Ralph; et al. (1998). The Data warehouse Lifecycle Toolkit" (2nd ed.). John Wiley & Sons Inc. ISBN   0-470-47957-4 .
 Rausch, Peter; Sheta, Alaa; Ayesh, Aladdin (2013). Business Intelligence and Performance Management: Theory, Systems, and Industrial Applications . Springer Verlag U.K. ISBN   978-1-4471-4865-4 . .
 Munoz, J.M. (2017). Global Business Intelligence . Routledge : UK. ISBN   978-1-1382-03686 .
 Chaudhuri, Surajit; Dayal, Umeshwar; Narasayya, Vivek (August 2011). "An Overview of Business Intelligence Technology". Communications of the ACM . 54 (8): 88– 98. doi : 10.1145/1978542.1978562 . S2CID   13843514 .

 External links [ edit ]

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Business intelligence .

 v t e
 Data warehouses

 Creating a data warehouse

 Concepts
 Database
 Dimension
 Dimensional modeling
 Fact
 OLAP
 Star schema
 Snowflake schema
 Reverse star schema
 Aggregate
 Single version of the truth

 Variants
 Column-oriented DBMS
 Data hub
 Data mesh
 Ensemble modeling patterns
 Anchor modeling
 Data vault modeling
 Focal point modeling
 HOLAP
 MOLAP
 ROLAP
 Operational data store

 Elements
 Data dictionary / Metadata
 Data mart
 Sixth normal form
 Surrogate key

 Fact
 Fact table
 Early-arriving fact
 Measure

 Dimension
 Dimension table
 Degenerate
 Slowly changing

 Filling
 Extract, transform, load (ETL)
 Extract, load, transform (ELT)
 Extract
 Transform
 Load

 Using a data warehouse

 Concepts
 Business intelligence
 Dashboard
 Data mining
 Decision support system (DSS)
 OLAP cube
 Data warehouse automation

 Languages
 Data Mining Extensions (DMX)
 MultiDimensional eXpressions (MDX)
 XML for Analysis (XMLA)

 Tools
 Business intelligence software
 Reporting software
 Spreadsheet

 Related

 People
 Bill Inmon
 Information factory
 Ralph Kimball
 Enterprise bus
 Dan Linstedt

 Products
 Comparison of OLAP servers
 Data warehousing products and their producers

 Authority control databases
 International GND
 National Czech Republic
